[Music] Good day, I'm Norman Wildberger.
Today, we're going to be looking further
at base 2 vexels, specifically focusing on the
arithmetic with base 2 vexels. We're trying to
understand Hindu-Arabic numerals from a vexel
point of view. The idea is that we're just
extending our understanding of vexels
a little bit to incorporate the idea
of numerals, and today we're going to be
concentrating on base 2 vexels. However,
it's not a big jump to go from the base
2 situation to the base 10 situation.
I remind you that this notion of vexel is a
very fundamental and flexible concept. It's a
multiset of singletons, and this actually
sheds new light on our earlier theory of
polynumbers because vexels and polynumbers are
effectively pretty much the same thing. So, we
can kind of bring together two different kinds of
mathematical objects now into a single framework.
So, what is a vexel? Well, here's an example of
a vexel, V. It's a multiset, and it has a lot of
these singletons in it. A singleton is just
a small list with one natural number in it,
and these natural numbers that appear here are
primitive natural numbers. So, if we actually
looked more carefully or closely at this two,
we would see a little multiset of strokes:
one, one. Alright, so that's a vexel, and
we've seen that we can also express it,
well, perhaps in this 'freeze' kind
of notation, as a column vector,
which is really effectively the same
thing as what we were talking about
earlier with polynumbers, where we have a
string of coefficients written vertically.
And I remind you that this polynumber also
corresponds to this polynomial kind of expression:
2 Alpha to the 0 + 0 Alpha + 3 Alpha squared +
Alpha cubed. It's worthwhile to really appreciate
that a polynomial like this is now really being
associated with this arguably more fundamental
kind of data structure or situation. So, the
2 Alpha to the zero, which is just like two,
corresponds to these two zero singletons,
3 Alpha squared corresponds to these three
singletons of two, and this Alpha cubed
corresponds to this singleton of three.
So, we're employing our multiset point
of view to understand polynumbers. Now,
one of the big advantages of thinking about
things this way is that vexel arithmetic is
very elemental because we're just working in
this very pleasant framework of multisets. So,
addition, for example, is just multiset addition.
Here's a vexel, here's another vexel. To add this
multiset and this multiset, we just put
all the singletons into a bigger multiset.
Multiplication is also interestingly easy
in some ways; it's the multiset extension of
the following essential product of singletons.
It's a rather novel product of singletons. The
product of the singleton n with the singleton
m is, by definition, a singleton n + m. Then,
when we want to multiply two vexels, we
just have to employ this basic rule for
each possible pair between the singletons in this
multiset and the singletons in that multiset. So,
this 0 * this one is one, this 0 * this one
is one, this 2 * this one is the singleton
three, and then the corresponding
products are four, four, and six.
This kind of multiplication corresponds to, on
the polynomial or polynumber side, the following:
so, this vexel here is really or can be thought
of as the polynumber 2 + Alpha squared. There's
two zeros and a single two, so that corresponds
to 2 + Alpha squared. This one corresponds to
Alpha plus Alpha to the 4th, and when we multiply
those with the usual polynumber multiplication,
we get 2 Alpha + Alpha cubed + 2 Alpha to the
4th + Alpha to the 6th. And that corresponds
to this product over here: 2 Alpha corresponds to
these two singletons, the Alpha cubed to that one,
the 2 Alpha to the fourth to these two, and
the Alpha to the sixth to the singleton six.
This technique of pinning polynomial or polynumber
arithmetic onto this more fundamental multiset
framework of vexels has another advantage: it
explains a former ambiguity that we had, kind
of a subtle issue that we never entirely resolved,
and that's the question of why adding zeros to a
polynumber doesn't change it. When we were looking
at polynumbers, basically lists of coefficients
written vertically, this polynumber here and this
polynumber were regarded as the same, even though
the actual number of entries here was different.
Somehow, adding a zero doesn't change things,
and it was hard to say why that was except to
declare that that's how it was going to be.
But now we can see that there's an explanation
for that in terms of the more fundamental objects
of the associated vexel. So, this thing here is
really a representation of this vexel: two zeros,
three twos, and a single three. When we look
at this thing as the fundamental object, well,
we can describe this in terms of a multiplicity
list in lots of ways. We can also say that there
are zero fours, zero fives, and zero sixes,
and so on, but it's really this object that
is the fundamental thing. Note that there's no
ambiguity here, right? There's nothing we can
add to this or take away, and it stays
the same; it's just this is the vexel.
For example, if you were programming, then at the
level of these lists, you would have to program
in the fact that adding the zero doesn't
make a difference. But if your computer is
working just with the multisets themselves,
then there's no need to even discuss that.
With that review, we can now look at these
base 2 vexels. We take the idea of a vexel
and we add a little bit to it to get a
new type of object called a base 2 vexel,
and we'll denote the type by this expression: Vex
2, which corresponds to base two vexels. This is a
new type of vexel where we agree that we're going
to have a further kind of exchange rule applying.
This is a rule that allows us to exchange two
singletons of the same type, actually two equal
singletons which appear in a multiset, with a
single singleton of the next higher number. So,
the singleton n and the singleton n together can
be replaced with the single singleton n + 1. This
is supposed to be true for any natural
number, that means 0, 1, 2, and so on.
For example, in Vex 2, here is a vexel, the same
one we've been thinking about: 2 0 3 1. Now,
if we regard this as a vexel in Vex 2, in other
words, a base 2 vexel, then we are allowed to
rewrite it because we can, for example, take
these two zeros here—this two really represents
two singleton zeros—and we can replace those
two singleton zeros with a singleton one. So,
the two here can be replaced with the one here,
and otherwise, it doesn't change. Similarly,
we can take two of these, which would
be singleton twos in our actual list,
and replace them with a singleton three, then
having altogether two singleton threes. At the
next stage, we could take these two singleton
threes and replace them with a singleton four.
In Vex 2, each of these is actually equal. These
are not equal as vexels, as ordinary vexels;
they're clearly very different. But in Vex 2,
we agree that they are all the same object.
This exchange rule allows us to have a lot of
different forms for the same base 2 vexel. But
we can also go the other way; we can exchange
two of one level for one of the next level,
but we can also exchange one of one
level for two of the previous level.
For example, here, our same 2 3 1, this base
2 vexel, can also be written as 2 0 5. What
we've done is we've taken this single one here,
which represents a 3 singleton, and converted
that 3 singleton to two 2 singletons. Now, there
were already three 2 singletons in our multiset,
so now altogether there are five 2 singletons.
There's no reason why we couldn't do that again;
we could take those 2 singletons and take
each one and replace it with a pair of 1
singletons. So, the same base 2 vexel is
this, this one here, 2 1 0. And once more,
we could replace these 10 with 20 of
the previous ones, giving us just 2 2.
So, we see we have quite a range of forms for
a base 2 vexel. We started with this one here,
the one that we've written down several
times already, and we saw that we could
kind of expand it out by replacing any twos with
one of the next ones. If we keep doing that,
eventually we get this expanded form
where there are only zeros and ones.
This is usually what is thought of
when we think of a base 2 number.
Those of you from a computer science
background will naturally be thinking
that this is the object that I'm
going to be working with exclusively,
but we're not going to work with these things
exclusively. Yes, this is a base 2 representation,
but we are also going to allow ourselves
the flexibility that this base 2 vexel
can legitimately be rewritten in this way
or also in this way. Now, this is a very
different kind of form. We could say this is the
compressed form, where we've pushed all of the
entries up so there are just zero singletons
here—there are really 2 2 zero singletons.
So, this is quite an interesting thing. We have
a base 2 vexel, and it can be written in this
expanded form just with zeros and ones, or all
of the content can be pushed up here to give us
just a number with a certain number of zero
singletons. Maybe I should say there's a bit
of a qualification to what I just said, right?
So, I said we could take a typical base 2 vexel,
and we could start pushing them all up and
getting this compressed form. That's certainly
true in the range of the smallish vexels
that we're considering here as examples,
but you could kind of imagine that if this
vexel here was, say, trillions and trillions
of digits long, instead of having four entries,
there were trillions and trillions of entries,
then pushing them all up and just getting a
compressed form is not at all trivial, okay?
Because every time you take one at some level
and replace it with two of the previous level,
you're doubling the numbers, and so if you
have to go trillions up, then you're basically
taking powers of two, 2 to the trillion or 2
to the trillion to the trillion, and so on. So,
you very well might end up with a situation where
this number here is outside of the range that you
have because we are, I remind you, insisting
that each one of these entries here actually
be natural numbers, primitive natural numbers
that we can actually explicitly write down.
So, we're definitely looking at things a little
bit differently here. In the standard treatment
of binary numbers, which is usually what base
2 vexels are called, they're always expressed
in expanded form, and moreover, they're
almost always written horizontally. The
usual convention is that the powers of two are
decreasing from left to right. So, the number 22,
or the natural number 22, is written in binary
as 10110, and in this representation, this zero
represents the number of ones, this represents
the number of twos, this the number of fours,
this the number of eights, and this the number of
16s. So, this is asserting that 22 can be built
up by taking 2 + 4 + 16, and indeed 22 is 2 + 4 +
16. So, this is the binary representation of 22.
This is the standard way of doing things, but
our notation is somewhat different because we
are writing this same thing vertically,
starting with the ones at the top,
what's usually called the ones at the top. So,
we wrote this as 0 1 1 0 1. The advantages of
writing things vertically rather than
horizontally are the same advantages
that we get by thinking about polynumbers and
vertical objects rather than horizontal objects.
This is made clear when we start thinking
about the arithmetic with base 2 vexels.
So, let's think about that. Let's think about
addition with base 2 vexels. Suppose, for example,
that we're interested in the relation 22 + 13 =
35, okay? So, here is 22 written as a vexel, as a
sort of polynumber in number form, and here is 13.
Let's just check this: so, this is 1, 0 twos, 4
and 8, this is 1 + 4 + 8, that is indeed 13, okay?
So, when we add these, well, it's not surprising;
we're just going to add component-wise. So, 2 +
1 is 3, 0 + 0 is 0, 3 + 1 is 4, and 1 + 1 is 2,
and indeed this is the binary representation of
35, just written vertically. So, it's three 1s,
no twos, four 4s, and two 8s. So, this is 16 + 4
4s is another 16, that's 32 plus 3 is indeed 35.
Now, another way of writing this is in expanded
form, okay? So, we could replace this base 2 vexel
with its expanded form, which we've already seen:
0 1 1 0 1. This is the usual binary representation
of 22, but with the ones at the top—ones, twos,
fours, eights, 16s— increasing powers of two going
down. This thing here is the binary representation
of 13; that's already in sort of expanded form.
And now, if we apply the same rule here, we
would get 0 + 1 is 1, 1 + 0 is 1, 1 + 1 is 2,
0 + 1 is 1, and 1 plus this empty zero is 1. So,
we're still doing basically polynumber arithmetic,
but now to get something in expanded form, we
would look at this 2 and think about replacing
it. So, replacing this 2 with a single
one of the next layer, this becomes zero,
and then this thing here becomes two. Then
I've done a few more steps, so I'm going to
replace that two that's now there with another
one of these, giving us two of those, and then
those two things are replaced with a single
one in the layer down, namely that one there.
So, this thing here is equal to 1 1 0 1 1.
And let's just check that that's really the
same number in binary: this would be 1s, 2s, 4s,
8s, 16s, and 32s. So, this would be 1 + 2 + 32,
which is indeed 35. So, this is another
way of describing the addition of these
things in the base 2 vexel language. But yet
another way is just to write 22 + 13 = 35.
This is also a legitimate expression in base
2 vexels because these are also base 2 vexels,
right? So, this base 2 vexel is the same as
this base 2 vexel, is the same as this one,
and this one is the same as this one, is the same
as this one, and this one is the same as this one,
is the same as this one. So, all of
these are valid computations in Vex 2,
even though in ordinary binary addition, we
would only really consider this plus this
equaling this. Even this, as an intermediate
object, would usually not be allowed.
There's a definite advantage, as we'll see, in
being a little bit more flexible about binary
arithmetic and not insisting that everything
has to have zeros and ones. That's not the
essential feature of binary arithmetic.
The essential feature of binary arithmetic,
I'm suggesting, is captured
by the exchange condition,
the fact that we are agreeing that two at
this level equals one at this level. That's
the crucial property of a base 2 vexel or,
in fact, of binary representation of numbers.
This line of reasoning becomes clearer when
we go to multiplication. Multiplication is
decidedly trickier than addition. So, let's
have a look at multiplication in this sort of
base two world. Let's look at 22 * 13, which is
286, and over here I just made that calculation
so you can check. Here's how we multiply
22 by 13: we usually write them like that,
then draw the line, and we calculate 3 * 22. In
that case, it's 66; it's relatively easy to do,
and 1 * 22, that's in this case also
easy to do, so we put the 22 over there,
moved over one. Then we add 66 + 220 = 286. So,
relatively simple multiplication in that case.
Now, how does the same thing look in binary?
The usual story in binary is to write 22 as
01101 and to write 13 as 1011, as we've seen,
and then essentially to do something like this
but sort of do it in binary. So, we take this
one—so one times all of this means we're just
basically copying this out, just as we copied
the two when we multiplied by one. Then we move
over one to this place, and we have to multiply
zero times all of that—well, that's just a row of
zeros. And then the next one, there's a one here,
so we have to copy this thing again, but we have
to move it over so that it's starting here now.
So, there's the 01101, and then there's one more
of them because we have to multiply by this one as
well. So, there's another copy right there: 01101.
Alright, so now, just as before up
here, we're going to have to add up
all these columns. Here we get a zero,
and here a one, and here a one, and here
a one. Here's the first place where something
interesting happens: we get a total of three,
but in the traditional form, we're not allowed to
write three there. We have to expand that three,
essentially think of it as 1 + 2. So, we
write the one for the one and the two as
a carry to give us a little one in the next
column representing the two. So, the total of
three that we got here is divided into this
one here and this one in the next place up.
Now, the sum in the next column is two, which
we write as 0 plus a carry of one. Then in
the next column, 1 + 1 is another two, which
is 0 plus a carry of one. Then 1 + 1 is two,
which is 0 plus a carry of one, and finally,
the carry of one comes down. So, then our total
is this number in binary, which is 0 ones, 2
twos, 4 fours, 8 eights, 16 sixteens, no 32s,
no 64s, no 128s, but a single 256. So, we see
that if we add these things up, we do get 286.
This is the standard story, but it's
actually quite a lot more subtle than
it usually appears because of the relatively
simple or small nature of the example we've
illustrated things with here, okay? If
we look at more complicated examples,
the story gets considerably more complicated,
and then it becomes clear that I think the
vertical approach that we're going to
show you now has some serious advantages.
Okay, so now let me show you the same
multiplication operation but in a vertical
form, and I think you'll start to see the
advantages in thinking vertically. Okay,
so here is that first number, that was 22,
and here is 13. Let's multiply them in this
vertical fashion. Okay, so how could we
do that? Well, we could essentially do
the same kind of thing as we did before.
So, over here is going to be the sum,
and what we're going to do is multiply this thing
here first by one, and that just means basically
copying this thing over here. Then we're going to
multiply the same thing by zero, which basically
is a column of zeros. Then multiplying it by one
here, we're going to have the same thing, but now
it's displaced down two. When we multiply by this
one, it's the same thing but displaced one more.
So, this is really exactly the same
story that we had before, except that
these things are now going down columns as
opposed to going across rows—no difference,
okay? But now what we can do is think about these
various rows—this is just the same thing as what
was happening in the columns before—but we can
add up the things in these various rows. So,
here's a zero, 1 + 0 is 1, 1 + 0 + 0 is 1, this is
1, here's a total of three, here's a total of one,
here's a total of one, here's a total of one.
Because we're first of all having this flexible
approach about base 2 vexel arithmetic,
we're not bothered by having a three here.
Okay, so in particular, if we wanted to, we could
stop the calculation—this is a legitimate output;
this is a proper representation of the product
of these two things in base 2 vexel world. But
we might consider this as an intermediate
calculation, and then we would carry this
on to reduce it, and that would involve taking
this three—because that's the only one that's
in this case bigger than one—and replacing that
three with a singleton one and then one of the
next one. Well, one of the next one would
make that a two, and that two is going to
be replaced with one of those, which is going to
be—then there's two of them there and replaced
with one of those. There'll be two of those
there and replaced with one of the final ones.
So, this is the same kind of calculation
as before, but it has the advantage that
we're working horizontally here. So, suppose
we were working, for example, with numbers
that had columns which were very long—maybe
hundreds or thousands of entries long—then
these sums that are going to be going across
here are also going to be correspondingly long,
okay? When you're doing this kind of long thing,
it can be advantageous to work horizontally rather
than vertically because you have more room at the
end because you're going to be writing down a long
number, okay? So, the number that you might get
at this level here is some number with 37 digits,
okay? It's nice to have room to write it
horizontally. If you're forced to work in
a column, then you have just this limited
amount of space at the bottom of the column
to write down the entry there. It's just
a notational difference, but in practice,
if you actually did big multiplications,
you would find that there is a difference.
So, this is all happening in Vexel 2—this is
arithmetic in base 2 vexels—and we can see
that there's something pleasant about this
vexel approach to this binary operation,
having this basic exchange property, which is
the essential feature that distinguishes vexel
arithmetic from base 2 vexel arithmetic
and allows us to deal with this kind of
intermediate calculation and indeed allows us to
collapse something like this if we want to. So,
we collapse all of this to just be 286—the
single entry 286 and nothing else below.
In our next video, I want to then
go to our main object of interest,
which are Hindu-Arabic numerals and the
arithmetic of Hindu-Arabic numerals. So,
it's much the same as what we've been doing now,
but the insights that we've gotten here will have
some effect on our approach to the way we set
out the arithmetic with Hindu-Arabic numerals.
In particular, we're going to be thinking about
multiplication in a little bit of a different way,
following this kind of lead. So, we're going
to be looking at Hindu-Arabic numerals and
really establishing a solid foundation
for them, independent of our primitive
natural numbers. We're going to be looking
at multiplication with something of a new
orientation. I hope you'll join me for that. I'm
Norman Wildberger. Thanks for [Music] listening.